
SQL Commands:

Use the following SQL commands to retrieve and manipulate data from the employees and departments tables.

1.To select all columns and rows from the employees table:

SELECT * FROM employees;

This command selects all columns and rows from the employees table.


2.To select only the name and salary columns of all employees with a salary greater than 50000:

SELECT name, salary FROM employees WHERE salary > 50000;

This command selects the name and salary columns of all employees whose salary is greater than 50000.


3. To calculate the average salary of all employees:

SELECT AVG(salary) FROM employees;

This command calculates the average salary of all employees in the employees table.


4. To count the number of employees who work in the "Marketing" department:

SELECT COUNT(*) FROM employees WHERE department_id = (SELECT id FROM departments WHERE name = 'Marketing');

This command counts the number of employees who work in the "Marketing" department.



5. To update the salary column of the employee with an id of 1001 to 60000:

UPDATE employees SET salary = 60000 WHERE id = 1001;

This command updates the salary column of the employee with an id of 1001 to 60000.



6. To delete all employees whose salary is less than 30000:

DELETE FROM employees WHERE salary < 30000;

This command deletes all employees whose salary is less than 30000 from the employees table.



7. To select all columns and rows from the departments table:

SELECT * FROM departments;

This command selects all columns and rows from the departments table.



8. To select only the name and manager columns of the "Finance" department:

SELECT name, manager FROM departments WHERE name = 'Finance';


This command selects the name and manager columns of the "Finance" department.


9. To calculate the total number of employees in each department:

SELECT departments.name, COUNT(*) FROM employees INNER JOIN departments ON employees.department_id = departments.id GROUP BY departments.name;

This command calculates the total number of employees in each department by joining the employees and departments tables and grouping by department name.


10. To insert a new department called "Research" with a manager named "John Doe":

INSERT INTO departments (name, manager) VALUES ('Research', 'John Doe');

This command inserts a new department called "Research" with a manager named "John Doe" into the departments table.

